Dr. Colecraft works on voltage-gated calcium channels which are critical for the biology of electrically active cells such as heart muscle and nerve cells. He focuses on fundamental understanding of how these channels operate in both normal and disease states, and engineering new molecules to regulate their activity for potential therapeutic benefit. 

Structure-function mechanisms of CaV channel beta subunits Voltage-dependent calcium (CaV) channels are multi-subunit protein complexes comprised of a main pore-forming a1 subunit and associated accessory proteins. Of the accessory proteins, b subunits (CaVb) are arguably the most important, being necessary for targeting the channel to the membrane and normalizing channel gating (the manner in which the channel opens and closes). Their essential role is emphasized by the severe neurological and cardiovascular phenotypes ensuing from CaVb dysregulation: epilepsy, altered threshold to pain, night blindness, and defects in cardiac development. 

We aim to understand: (1) at a quantitative level the mechanisms by which CaVbs exert such powerful effects on CaV channels; (2) the role of the a1-b interaction in disease; and (3) the potential of the a1-b association as a target for therapeutic drugs. A powerful complement of approaches is used including: whole-cell and single-channel patch clamp electrophysiology, fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) determination of protein-protein interactions, molecular biology, bioinformatics, and modeling. 

Structure-function mechanisms of CaV channel beta subunits Electrical signals (or action potentials) generated by ions traversing cell surface ion channels are a vital signaling mechanism in biology. Electrical signals co-ordinate the activity of millions of cardiac myocytes to generate the heartbeat; underlie the orchestrated firing of neurons that enable sight, speech, movement, and formation of memories; and control the release of hormones that control glucose homeostasis, growth, and development. 

Remarkably, these very diverse biological phenomena utilize a common signal transduction paradigm─ membrane depolarization encoded in action potentials leads to the opening of voltage-dependent Ca2+ (CaV) channels, permitting an influx of Ca2+ ions that trigger the appropriate biological response by binding specific Ca2+-sensitive proteins. Given their central role in converting electrical signals into biological responses it is no wonder that modulating the activity of CaV channels is a powerful method to regulate physiology, and is an important therapy for many serious diseases. The lab is broadly interested in the molecular physiology and regulation of voltage-gated ion channels in health and disease. 

Active research is ongoing in the following areas:
1. Design, Development, and Applications of Novel Genetically Encoded Calcium Channel Blockers 
2. Regulation of Calcium Channel Trafficking and Modulation in Heart 
3. Molecular Regulation of Potassium Channel Complexes in Heart. 

Colecraft HM.2020.Designer genetically encoded voltage-dependent calcium channel inhibitors inspired by RGK GTPases.J Physiol. 598(9):1683-1693. 
Kanner SA, Shuja Z, Choudhury P, Jain A,Colecraft HM. 2020.Targeted deubiquitination rescues distinct trafficking-deficient channelopathies.Nature Methods 17(12):1245-53. 
Morgenstern TJ, Park J, Fan QR,Colecraft HM.2019.A potent voltage-gated calcium channel inhibitor engineered from a nanobody targeted to auxiliary CaVβ subunits.Elife. pii: e49253. doi: 10.7554/eLife.49253. 
Puckerin AA, Chang DD, Shuja Z, Choudhury P, Scholz J,Colecraft HM. 2018.Engineering selectivity into RGK GTPase inhibition of voltage-dependent calcium channels.PNAS. 115(47):12051-12056 
Kanner SA, Morgenstern T,Colecraft HM.2017.Sculpting ion channel functional expression with engineered ubiquitin ligases.Elife. pii: e29744. doi: 10.7554/eLife.29744