Studies on the cell biology of recombination are still in their infancy, and much remains to be uncovered in terms of the physical behavior of chromosomes, repair foci, and the factors that comprise them. The advent of cell biological techniques like protein tagging and observable chromosomal loci have permitted programs of experimentation that can address these fundamental questions of biology. By using these tools, we hope to unify physical phenomenology with genetic and biochemical models of recombination, permitting a complete understanding of this crucial process. In so doing, we hope to gain insight that may be consequential to studies of human disease and develop new and useful technologies for the manipulation of cells. We use budding yeast as an experimental organism to study essential biological processes and we are pursuing 3 main areas of research: (1) visualization of homologous recombination processes in real time in living cells with an emphasis on the behavior of the broken ends of a double-strand break, (2) identification of new interrelationships between players in the DNA repair pathways (especially for crosslinks), (3) examining the consequences of gene dysregulation in cancer cells, or during viral infection, to discover novel genetic interaction pathways to lead to therapeutic target discovery. 

1) We are currently studying the physical behavior of chromosomes in living cells and how they respond to DNA damage. We have found that increased mobility of chromosomes after DNA damage facilitates homology search. We are studying precisely how the DNA ends are processed after a double-strand break (DSB) by creating site-specific DSBs using meganucleases, TALEN®s and CRISPR-Cas9. Each DNA end flanking the DSB is fluorescently tagged along with the repair template on the homolog. After induction of a DSB, we can visualize repair proteins recruited to the ends before the homology search begins. We observe tight temporal covariance among increased chromosome mobility, the physical pairing of homologous loci and the resultant gene conversion events. A key question is what happens to the second end of the break during HDR. We have designed a system with chromosomal tags on both ends of the break to allow us to independently visualize each end and track its behavior before, during, and after HR. By determining the precise choreography of DNA end movement during repair, we will better understand many of the open questions surrounding the resolution of DSBs. 

2) Analysis of pairwise combinations of double mutants provides a powerful method for determining relationships within a genetic pathway (e.g., epistasis or suppression). Such a genetic analysis becomes increasingly robust when combined with sensitizing conditions, such as treatment with a DNA damaging agent. We have developed an approach that focuses our attention on sub-networks of the DNA damage response by first identifying sets of strains that are sensitive to a particular DNA damaging agent. Next, under the same damaging conditions, pairwise crosses are performed of this subset of strains, which includes known DNA damage repair mutants. By applying this approach to a DNA crosslinking reagent, cisplatin, which is an important chemotherapeutic compound, we have identified over 150 genes involved in cisplatin sensitivity, some of which were not previously recognized as part of the DNA repair response network. Examination of systematic pairwise combinations of these mutations will reveal the global organization of this repair network. 

3) We have developed methods to rapidly screen the entire yeast gene disruption library to reveal genetic interactions between overexpression of a protein and deletion/mutation of more than 5,500 chromosomal genes. These interactions reveal the pathways that are affected when particular proteins are mis-expressed. Although many cancer genomics and genome-wide expression studies have highlighted the important relationship between gene dosage and phenotype, little attention has been given to studying the effect of gene overexpression. To understand the biological consequences of mis-expression, we overexpress the yeast homolog of the cancer protein of interest and identify genetic interactions. These interactions are often preserved in human cells and reveal interactions that are useful in guiding personalized chemotherapy in cancer patients. During the COVID-19 pandemic, we are using our expression system to explore the pathways that are affected when SAR2-CoV-2 proteins are expressed after infection. We are focusing on viral proteins that target the endoplasmic reticulum to assemble the viral replicon.