Our understanding of how the biology of various diseases relates to the central dogma that DNA encodes RNA, which encodes protein has been buoyed by rapid technological advances in DNA and RNA sequencing and has led to some of the first advances in personalized medicine. However, characterization of the final and arguably most actionable element of the central dogma, protein, has lagged behind. Among the various proteomic parameters, a comprehensive description of the landscape of covalent protein modifications in any given cell is particularly challenging. Our research efforts are highly multidisciplinary, which have been largely focused on two programs, i.e., (1) novel protein posttranslational modifications (PTMs), and (2) novel covalent protein modifications by small molecule drugs. Regarding (1), the entire repertoire of protein posttranslational modifications (PTMs) is enormous, with ~400 different known types, and many more unknown ones (i.e., the “dark proteome”). PTMs are inaccessible by genomic sequencing tools. Instead, they are almost exclusively analyzed by proteomic technologies. The functional characterization of a PTM event ultimately depends on the unequivocal assignment of the modification site. However, the chemical natures of PTMs are diverse, and many types of PTMs are not amenable to traditional proteomic technologies for site-localization with single amino acid resolution because they are, for example, labile, heterogeneous or low-abundance. We have developed a multidisciplinary program (i.e., chemical biology, quantitative-/chemo-proteomics, computation biology, biochemistry, molecular biology and animal models) towards the functional analyses of a number of important PTMs, including protein tyrosine sulfation, phosphorylation and Poly-ADP-ribosylation. Regarding (2), besides these naturally occurring PTMs, covalent protein modification has been increasingly appreciated as a novel therapeutic modality. The current efforts on drug development have been mostly focused on targeting a small fraction of the human proteome with good pharmacological tractability (e.g., kinases). It has been estimated, however, that approximately 90% of human proteins (e.g., transcription factors, adaptors and intrinsically disordered proteins) have not been effectively targeted by small-molecule drugs, because, for example, they lack traditionally defined binding pockets. We have also been particularly active in the development of covalent protein modification and chemoproteomic technologies that potentially will revolutionize the principle of drug development by pushing the boundaries of the druggable proteome.